W-11939773-schedulerEdits-duke (#2389)
mulesoft/docs-mule-runtime-3: modules/ROOT/pages/scheduler-concept.adoc

ifndef::env-site,env-github[]
include::_attributes.adoc[]
endif::[]
:page-aliases: scheduler-xml-reference.adoc

> The Scheduler component is a Mule message source that triggers the execution of a flow based on a time-based condition and creates a new Mule message for each execution of the flow. For example, a Scheduler might execute every 5 seconds.

Author: ```suggestion
The Scheduler component is a Mule message source that triggers the execution of a flow based on a time-based condition and creates a new Mule message for each execution of the flow. For example, a Scheduler might execute every 5 seconds, starting a new instance of the flow and creating a new Mule message with each execution.
```

> The Scheduler component is a Mule message source that triggers the execution of a flow based on a time-based condition and creates a new Mule message for each execution of the flow. For example, a Scheduler might execute every 5 seconds, starting a new instance of the flow and creating a new Mule message with each execution.

Author: ```suggestion
The Scheduler component is a Mule message source that triggers the execution of a flow based on a time-based condition and creates a new Mule message for each execution of the flow. For example, a Scheduler might start a new instance of the flow and create a new Mule message for that flow every 5 seconds or every day at 12:00 in a given time zone.
```

> The Scheduler component is a Mule message source that triggers the execution of a flow based on a time-based condition and creates a new Mule message for each execution of the flow. For example, a Scheduler might start a new instance of the flow and create a new Mule message for that flow every 5 seconds or every day at 12:00 in a given time zone.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Scheduler component is a Mule message source that triggers the execution of a flow based on a time-based condition. For example, a Scheduler might create and send a message that will trigger the flow processing every 5 seconds or every day at 12:00 in a given time zone.
```

Consider the following when adding a Scheduler to your Mule application:

* Schedulers use the same timezone as the machine on which Mule is running. However, if an application is running in CloudHub, the Scheduler conforms to the UTC timezone, regardless of the geographic region in which the application is running.
+

> To set a time zone for the Scheduler, see `timeZone` in <<props_cron_expressions>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set a different time zone for the Scheduler, see `timeZone` in <<props_cron_expressions>>.
```

> * The `disallowConcurrentExecution` property enables you to prevent the Scheduler from triggering the execution of the flow while a previously triggered execution is still running.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `disallowConcurrentExecution` property enables you to prevent the Scheduler from triggering the execution of the flow while a previously-triggered execution is running.
```

> * The `disallowConcurrentExecution` property enables you to prevent the Scheduler from triggering the next execution of a flow while the previously executed flow is still running.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The `disallowConcurrentExecution` property enables you to prevent the Scheduler from triggering the execution of the flow while a previously triggered execution is still running.
```

* If xref:execution-engine.adoc#backpressure[back-pressure] occurs because no resources are available at the time of the scheduled trigger, Mule skips that execution.
//Enhancement request for this: MULE-14930
* In a Mule runtime engine cluster or multi-worker CloudHub deployment, the Scheduler executes only on the primary node (that is, only in one Mule instance).

== Architecture

Like other Mule message source components, a Scheduler is the first component in a Mule flow.

image::scheduler-component-ex.png["Scheduler component in Mule flow"]

The XML for the Scheduler consists of the following elements:

* `<scheduler />`: Top-level element of the Scheduler.
* `<scheduling-strategy />`: Second-level element that accepts one of the following children:
** `<fixed-frequency />`: For common scheduling frequencies, such as every second.
** `<cron />`: For <<cron_expressions, cron expressions>> and time zone settings.

> The Scheduler sets a scheduling strategy at a fixed frequency or an interval based on a cron expression:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Scheduler sets a scheduling strategy at a fixed frequency or an interval based on a cron expression. For example:
```

> * The fixed frequency setting in this Scheduler triggers the generation of a Mule message in a new execution of the flow every fifteen seconds:

Author: ```suggestion
* The fixed frequency setting in the following Scheduler executes every fifteen seconds:
```

+
[source, xml]
----
<flow name="ex-fixed-frequency-flow" >
  <scheduler doc:name="Scheduler">
    <scheduling-strategy>
      <fixed-frequency frequency="15" timeUnit="SECONDS" />
    </scheduling-strategy>
  </scheduler>
  <!-- One or more processors here. -->
</flow>
----
+
* The cron expression in this Scheduler triggers the generation of a Mule message in a new execution of the flow every fifteen seconds:
+
[source, xml]
----
<flow name="ex-cron-expression-flow" >
  <scheduler doc:name="Scheduler" >
    <scheduling-strategy >
      <cron expression='0/15 * * * * ? '/>
    </scheduling-strategy>
  </scheduler>
  <!-- One or more processors here. -->
</flow>
----

> At least one processor must follow the Scheduler. Processors include Mule components and connector operations, such as an HTTP Request operation or Transform Message component. Failure to provide a processor produces a `MuleRuntimeException` and causes the deployment of the Mule application to fail with the following ERROR message in the logs (edited for readability):

Reviewer: Not sure about including this here, this is for every flow (you cannot have an empty flow).

Author: Ok, it could go in the flow docs if it applies generally to all flows that lack processors after the message source.

Author: For context, I was hoping to show where the Scheduler fits in the flow architecturally so that people can understand the context. I'm not sure that the info hurts here, since this is the only Mule component that is a message source.

Author: We could move it to the flow doc later or share it there with an include.

[source,logs]
----
ERROR ...MuleRuntimeException ...
The content of element 'flow' is not complete.
One of '{"http://www.mulesoft.org/schema/mule/core":abstract-message-processor,
"http://www.mulesoft.org/schema/mule/core":abstract-mixed-content-message-processor}'
is expected.
----

> For Scheduler attributes, see <<reference>>.

Reviewer 2: Do you need this? Since Reference is the next line, I don't think it's necessary.

[[reference]]
== Reference

The Scheduler elements accept attributes for configuring the execution interval and concurrency.

[[props_scheduler]]
=== Scheduler (`<scheduler/>`)

By default, the Scheduler does not wait for one execution of a given flow to complete before executing another instance of the flow at the configured cadence. You can change this behavior by setting the `disallowConcurrentExecution="true"` attribute directly in the configuration XML.

[%header,cols="1a,4a"]
|===
| Attribute XML | Description

|`disallowConcurrentExecution`

> | When this attribute is set to `true`, the Scheduler skips its scheduled execution if a previous execution is still running. Once the flow is done, the Scheduler executes at the next configured interval. The default value is `false`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| When this attribute is set to `true`, the Scheduler skips its scheduled execution if a previous execution is still running. Once the flow finishes, the Scheduler executes at the next configured interval. The default value is `false`.
```

> | When this attribute is set to `true`, the Scheduler skips its scheduled execution if the flow is still running. Once the flow is done, the Scheduler executes at the next configured interval. The default value is `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| When this attribute is set to `true`, the Scheduler skips its scheduled execution if a previous execution is still running. Once the flow is done, the Scheduler executes at the next configured interval. The default value is `false`.
```

[source,logs]
----
INFO  2022-11-09 15:15:43,082 ...
...scheduler.DefaultSchedulerMessageSource:
Flow 'scheduler-disallowConcurrentExecution-ex' is already running and
'disallowConcurrentExecution' is set to 'true'. Execution skipped.

INFO  2022-11-09 15:15:43,083 ...
...scheduler.DefaultSchedulerMessageSource:
Flow 'scheduler-disallowConcurrentExecution-ex' is already running and
'disallowConcurrentExecution' is set to 'true'. Execution skipped.
----

[[props_fixed_frequency]]
=== Fixed Frequency (`<fixed-frequency/>`)

The fixed frequency scheduling strategy accepts the following attributes:

[%header,cols="1a,1a,1a,4a"]
|===
|Attribute | XML | Default | Description

|*Frequency*
| `frequency`
| `1000`
|The frequency at which the Scheduler triggers the flow given the `timeUnit` setting.

| *Start Delay*
| `startDelay`
| `0`
| The amount of time to delay execution of the Scheduler for the first time after the application starts. This property uses the same `timeUnit` as the frequency.

| *Time Unit*
| `timeUnit`
| `MILLISECONDS`
| One of the following time units for the values of `frequency` and `startDelay`:

`MILLISECONDS`, `SECONDS`, `MINUTES`, `HOURS`, or `DAYS`

|===

> This strategy delays executes the Scheduler every 10 seconds after an initial 10 second delay:

Author: revised per suggestion

> This strategy delays execution of the Scheduler for 10 seconds and then executes every 10 seconds:

Author: ```suggestion
This strategy delays executes the Scheduler every 10 seconds after an initial 10 second delay:
```

> This strategy delays execution of the Scheduler for 10 seconds and then executes every 10 seconds:

Reviewer 2: It is not clear what executes every 10 seconds. Is it the scheduler or the flow? Can you reword this to clarify?

Author: done

[source,xml]
----
<scheduler doc:name="Scheduler" >
  <scheduling-strategy >
    <fixed-frequency frequency="10" timeUnit="SECONDS" startDelay="10"/>
  </scheduling-strategy>
</scheduler>
----

[[props_cron_expressions]]
=== Cron (`<cron/>`)

For more complex scheduling strategies, you can use a cron expression.

[%header,cols="1a,1a,4a"]
|===
|Attribute |XML |Description

| *Expression*
| `expression`

> | A cron expression for triggering the Scheduler. There is no default cron expression. For guidance with expressions, see <<cron_expressions>>. Example: `expression="1 1 1 1,7 * ?"`

Author: revised as suggested

> | A a cron expression for triggering the Scheduler. There is no default cron expression. For guidance with expressions, see <<cron_expressions>>. Example: `expression="1 1 1 1,7 * ?"`

Author: ```suggestion
| A cron expression for triggering the Scheduler. There is no default cron expression. For guidance with expressions, see <<cron_expressions>>. Example: `expression="1 1 1 1,7 * ?"`
```

> | Use a cron expression for when to do a trigger. There is no default cron expression. For guidance with expressions, see <<cron_expressions>>. Example: `expression="1 1 1 1,7 * ?"`

Author: ```suggestion
| A a cron expression for triggering the Scheduler. There is no default cron expression. For guidance with expressions, see <<cron_expressions>>. Example: `expression="1 1 1 1,7 * ?"`
```

> | Use a cron expression for when to do a trigger. There is no default cron expression. For guidance with expressions, see <<cron_expressions>>. Example: `expression="1 1 1 1,7 * ?"`

Reviewer 2: "do a trigger" is not clear.

"when to do a trigger" > when to trigger the flow???

Author: done

| *Time Zone*
| `timeZone`

> | Time zone passed as system property, or in machine's operating system. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/TimeZone.html[Java time zone^] values are supported. Avoid Java abbreviations, such as `PST` and `AGT`, and instead use the full-name Java equivalents, such as `America/Los_Angeles`. Example: `timeZone="America/Argentina/Buenos_Aires"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Time zone passed as a system property, or in a machine's operating system. https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/TimeZone.html[Java time zone^] values are supported. Avoid Java abbreviations, such as `PST` and `AGT`, and instead use the full-name Java equivalents, such as `America/Los_Angeles`. Example: `timeZone="America/Argentina/Buenos_Aires"`
```

|===

> Example that uses a cron expression to trigger the flow at 12:00 every day in the `America/Los_Angeles` time zone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example uses a cron expression to trigger the flow at 12:00 every day in the `America/Los_Angeles` time zone.
```

* `L`: Last day of the week or month, or last specific day of the month
  (such as `6L` for the last Saturday of the month).
* `W`: Weekday, which is valid in the month and day-of-the-week fields.
* `#`: "nth" day of the month. For example, `#3` is the third day of the month.

//source info: +http://www.quartz-scheduler.org/documentation/quartz-2.x/tutorials/crontrigger.html+

This example logs the message "hello" every second:

[source,XML,linenums]
----
<flow name="cronFlow" >
  <scheduler doc:name="Scheduler" >
    <scheduling-strategy >
      <cron expression="* * * * * ?" />
    </scheduling-strategy>
  </scheduler>
  <logger level="INFO" doc:name="Logger" message='"hello"'/>
</flow>
----

Note that there are a number of free online tools that can help you build Cron
expressions.

== Examples in Anypoint Exchange

> The following examples in https://www.mulesoft.com/exchange/[Anypoint Exchange^] show use cases for a Scheduler component:

Author: revised per suggestion

> Several examples that you can find in https://www.mulesoft.com/exchange/[Anypoint Exchange^] show use cases for a Scheduler component:

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: 

The following examples in https://www.mulesoft.com/exchange/[Anypoint Exchange^] show use cases for the Scheduler component:

or

https://www.mulesoft.com/exchange/[Anypoint Exchange^] use the Scheduler component:

Author: done

> Several examples that you can find in https://www.mulesoft.com/exchange/[Anypoint Exchange^] show use cases for a Scheduler component:

Author: ```suggestion
The following examples in https://www.mulesoft.com/exchange/[Anypoint Exchange^] show use cases for a Scheduler component:
```

* _Data Sync Using Watermarking and Batch_
* _Import Contacts into Microsoft Dynamics CRM_
* _Import Leads into Salesforce_
* _Importing a CSV File into mongoDB_
* _Importing an Email Attachment Using the IMAP Connector_
* _Salesforce to MySQL Database Using Batch Processing_
* _Sending a CSV File Through Email Using SMTP_

To download and open the project from Anypoint Studio, see xref:studio::import-project-exchange.adoc[].

== Debugging in Anypoint Studio

> In the Anypoint Studio xref:studio::to-run-debug-mode.adoc[debug mode], the Mule application disables the triggering of events. You can manually execute the Scheduler component when debugging by clicking the green arrow icon in Studio that appears at the bottom of the component, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In Anypoint Studio xref:studio::to-run-debug-mode.adoc[debug mode], the Mule application disables the triggering of events. You can manually execute the Scheduler component when debugging by clicking the green arrow icon in Studio that appears at the bottom of the component, for example:
```
